This is Gaddis Smith, and it's June 30, 2005.
Okay.
And you don't even have to worry about it.
It's just there.
Well, I'm very Yale.
I graduated from Yale College in 1954 and did my Ph.D.
here in history, taught only three years at Duke, and then was back in 1961 on the faculty.
And I officially retired in 2000, but I'm still pretty busy.
mainly with a big book, which is overdue, which is called Yale and the External World, the Shaping of the University in the 20th Century.
I heard a cute story when I was arranging about it.
I said, Jens, did you get me a copy of Yale?
Oh, yeah, because people have been... That book was getting publicity about five years ago.
Here's the article for 99.
Oh, gosh, yeah.
Well...
So I'm still working on that.
It's nearly finished, but it's just very enormous because the emphasis is on how Yale was shaped by external developments, changes in American society, war and peace, and all of that.
And you don't have to worry about that.
Okay.
So the focus of the big book is sort of on the core institution, on the education, on the faculty, the students, the leadership of the university.
So I have not
actually looked into, in terms of archival research, the Yale Press.
But I, of course, have been an observer of the Yale Press.
I was on the Publications Committee in the 1990s for about four or five years.
And my first book was a Yale Press book in 1965.
And I'd known a good many of the
key people at the Yale Press over the years.
Well, 1965, that's 40 years ago since I graduated from college.
But you've been around Yale for fully half of the life of the press.
Yeah, and of the years since, I mean, my book, his big book, starts in 1900.
So I've been around for more than half the time.
So there are certain moments when the Yale Press got a lot of attention and maybe notoriety that you will probably pick up, but I could list the ones that occurred to me.
I'd be interested in the attention and the notoriety.
Okay.
One of the editors, I think he was still called the editors, or directors, was Eugene Davidson.
I don't know his exact years, but probably late 30s into the early 50s.
And he was quite an isolationist before Pearl Harbor.
And two books that Yale Press published that did get an awful lot of political attention and are still very controversial, as what they represented, were by Charles Beard.
the um one was and they were they were bitter polemic attacks on fdr and yale public oh yeah they uh they were very polemical no questions about it uh and um so um one was uh i think called the roosevelt in the making of american foreign policy i mean i don't have the titles right but you can buy it i think um covered 1933 to 1940
um saying he's taking us into war well that was war was coming and then the other one uh focused on 1941 and that one became was published i think in 46 and it was part of the even though beard himself was was a left-wing liberal for most of his life really
Yeah.
Was he associated with the university at all?
Oh, no.
He is among, he's perhaps the most political and prominent of American historians.
No kidding.
In the 20th century, although he died, I think, in 1948.
And his, the book that got him fame, Yale didn't publish, press it barely begun.
It was called The Economic
origins of the Constitution, which argued that the Constitution was not handed down by God, but was created by selfish economic interests who were out to improve their own fortunes.
And then during the First World War, then he was professor at Columbia.
And during the First World War, he was a critic of American entry into the First World War.
And when the president of Columbia fired two tenured faculty members for criticizing the government of the United States, Beard resigned, a professorship at Columbia.
But he was a prolific writer.
And he and his wife, Mary Beard, were really famous figures.
And then I think, from my point of view, he really went over the top with these extreme attacks on Roosevelt.
Why were they published by Yale, do you think?
Well, Eugene Davidson.
I think, who shared those views.
I think that's the one time that Yale Press, in my opinion, really stepped out of bounds, if bounds are defined as keeping yourself focused on scholarship and not getting involved directly in politics.
scholarly books that certainly have a political objective.
And have a point of view, of course.
Yeah, sure, of course.
But as you said, these are polemical things.
Yeah, yeah.
So Eugene Davidson is someone to look at.
And I guess you've got the director's files and all these things.
They're giving me free, it's really kind of fun.
I'm looking forward to it, you know.
Another issue
which is still somewhat alive, and it's quite different, is the Vinland map.
Do you know about the Vinland map?
Yeah, I'd love to hear you tell me about it.
All right.
There are still schools that claim it's authentic, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, and I'm puzzled myself as to whether it was or not.
I just come back from Iceland, actually, so.
I got back on Saturday, so...
And this was very much in my mind because of the Viking explorations.
And I'm beginning to think it may have been authentic, but what Yale Press did, and I guess Chester Kerr was the head at that point.
This is 1965.
First, this manuscript turned up.
It's a little mysterious as to exactly how it turned up, but it was found
interleaved, interbound, in a medieval manuscript.
And for a long time, the purchaser of it, on behalf of Yale, was secret, but it was Paul Mellon.
That was revealed after Paul Mellon's death.
Was it after his death that it finally came out?
It didn't come out until after his death.
Oh, well.
Because, I mean, he was so generous to Yale.
Oh, yeah, and he paid half a million dollars for it, which is a hell of a lot of money, even then.
The jump change for Yale.
Yeah, for him.
A guy named Alex Vitor, who was curator of maps, married to a very wealthy woman, who's still alive, and who has taken a great interest in this.
She's a DuPont, Mrs. Vitor.
So, Yale brought it out.
They didn't consult scholars.
So, the Yale faculty was very upset.
Samuel Elliott Morrison,
great Harvard historian of maritime affairs, among many other things.
He was furious about it.
The greatest selling author in the history of the Oxford University Press, I think, in fact.
Could be.
They said it.
Yeah, I read that.
I went to school, high school, reading Morrison and Commentary.
The statue of Cromwell Avenue in Boston outside of St.
Louis.
Yeah, great statue.
I love that statue.
Looking out to sea and all of that.
And then
The Yale Press brought it out and announced it.
There was no previous announcement.
So the publication day was October 12, 1965.
New Haven has, at least then, had reputed to have the highest percentage of people of Italian origin of any city outside of Italy.
Really?
Yeah.
The mayor was, most of our mayors have been Italian.
And Worcester Street, and the pizza began here, and the World Headquarters of the Knights of Columbus, the big skyscraper down there.
That's the World Headquarters of the Knights of Columbus.
I didn't know that.
Yeah.
So, oh, boy.
The local people were pretty angry.
And Chester Kerr said, oh, it was just a coincidence that we brought all bullshit.
You know, the scholarly attacks developed, and again, you probably know the story.
What appeared to be definitive proof of its inauthenticity was a chemical test of the ink.
And so these sort of forensic chemists said this was artificial synthetic chemical, which was developed in the 1920s.
And so it must have been forged.
from the 1920s or since.
Pretty good job, though.
Yeah, and then the thing kind of roiled along, and it appeared that the case was over.
But then some other chemists came in, and this was just about maybe 10 years ago, and said, on the contrary, what these first chemists didn't do
was to examine the ink of other unquestionably authentic contemporary manuscripts.
And when that was done, they found the traces of this chemical, which in fact wasn't, maybe it had been synthesized, but it was a chemical that existed in nature.
So the chemical test was invalidated.
And then Yale Press brought out another edition of it about five years ago with a good introduction
an explanation of the whole story.
Well, because now it's a class celeb.
Yeah, it was then, and still back and forth.
My own view, because I do some maritime history, having spent these two weeks in Iceland and looking at some of their extraordinary museums there and materials, that it's pretty easy to explain knowledge.
equal to what was outlined in that map.
It's also said, and I haven't confirmed this anyway, I don't want to get too far away, that Christopher Columbus himself went to Iceland in preparation for proposing his trip, because the Vikings were the preeminent mariners.
The only thing that's a little bit against that is that the Great Age of Iceland
was to say the first 300 years from its first settlement in 950.
And then, for a variety of reasons, it was declining.
The climate was changing.
The Greenland settlement collapsed.
There's no question that they had a settlement in Newfoundland.
I mean, that's fully confirmed by archaeologists.
So by 1490, or whenever Columbus may have gone there,
This was no longer necessarily the place to go to get information.
But anyway.
But that was... Even if something's in eclipse or decline, you can still pick up a few... And of course, the Icelanders were already renowned for writing everything down.
And maybe there were some good charts.
You had charts and sagas and everything.
Most of which are...
preserved in their originals in these museums.
I wrote a little bit in my last book about the Icelandic saga.
That's a great example of cultural repatriation, where the sagas will return to Iceland.
Oh, yeah.
It's an extraordinary country.
What was your book?
That book was called The Splendor, A Splendor of Letters, The Permanence of Books.
It was published two years ago by Harper's.
They have a museum which is basically devoted to the literary.
The Marty Magnuson Museum.
Yeah.
Which was the same name.
That was how they worked the details to get the stuff done.
He's the guy who took them out.
We had a guy.
The main purpose of this trip was I went with a group led by a geologist, very distinguished geologist.
And so we were basically looking at the
the volcanoes and the glaciers.
But we went all around the island, and we had a guy named Arnie Magnuson.
Okay.
It was wonderful.
Oh, gosh, he was very learned, and he was just... So, anyway.
So, those two books, or actually three books, since there were two by Charles Weir.
Oh, and then, incidentally, Samuel L. Morrison was involved in both of these controversies, in a way.
the Vinland map, but when Beard's second book came out, and it's after the Second World War, Beard was quite ill, but Morrison apparently didn't realize that, and wrote a scathing review called History Through a Beard.
Wow.
And then Beard died.
So those are two episodes.
So the criticism of the press
And the first instance was basically that it was involving itself.
That it was isolationist, and the director was isolationist and was, you know.
Would that have happened if the press wasn't a private entity, do you think?
Because it was not a division of the university.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, I think the, you know, as far as I can tell, once it became fully part of the university, the editors of the press had the
the freedom to select the manuscripts that they're going to publish, and publish what they choose to publish.
I like the idea that the press, I would have thought, and one thing that I learned very early on, and I'm just getting my feet wet, and we just started literally this week, is that one would assume that the University Press, one of its reasons to exist is to
as to publish the creative work of faculty.
Well, it was.
Apparently, that's really not ever... Well, it was going on, certainly.
But that doesn't necessarily give you a leg up in getting your stuff published here.
Not now.
Not now at all.
But let me come back to that a little bit.
You're mentioning that the press was not really, in most of the first half of its history, legally part of the university.
And that's, I mean, that is interesting, and I don't know how that compares with other university presses.
I'll find out.
The George Parnelly Day, and indeed there's a large collection of George Parnelly Day papers over in historical manuscripts and archives in Sterling Library, because he was the treasurer of the university for about 30 years.
And quite a remarkable man.
So this was basically the creation of a
a very energetic, young, at that point, businessman.
The Yale Alumni Magazine, which was called the Alumni Weekly, was established a few years earlier in the 1890s.
That also was a completely private, profit-making publication.
And now, of course, it bears a relationship to the university.
It was very similar to that of the press from a budgetary point of view.
It's astonishing that the press actually operated in the black class here.
Did it?
It's amazing, isn't it?
So they may be one of the few.
Well, I can read all of these dismal articles.
The Chronicle of Higher Education, and there was one recently, an academic publishing
survive, sort of thing.
And they publish, what, 300-something titles a year?
Yeah, that's amazing.
It is amazing, but the art books are exquisite.
Yeah, yeah.
They really are.
And that was one of the things I wanted to emphasize, which you, of course, see.
I don't know quite how that came about.
I saw John Ryland the other day.
He credits John Nichol in England.
In London.
Yeah.
Because most of these books
were basically developed in the London office.
But it's not just the development there.
I guess his business sense, I guess the... He would recruit the authors and... But, I mean, they were hemorrhaging money, apparently.
And even Mellon, who was underwriting it to a degree, was becoming really upset.
And they recruited this guy from Oxford, I guess it was, and just totally turned it around.
Well, they're wonderful books, and I think... They're the best.
Yeah, there's no question.
That is bad.
I see them.
I review.
I get books from publishers.
Yeah, that really sets Yale Press apart, I think, from other universities.
And now they do the Metropolitan Museum books, and they do the Artists of Chicago books.
I don't know if they do the MFA in Boston books, but I mean, they have things with the British Library.
It's amazing, and they're fabulous.
And not only are they beautiful, the scholarship is excellent, yeah.
Who ever thought that a university press would really become prominent in the publication of illustrated books?
Yeah, yeah.
It almost went counter to what university press would do.
I don't know details about the production of those books, but there was a company, I think it still exists under this name, Meriden.
Yeah, they're owned.
I've seen their books.
Meriden, whatever.
But they do the illustrations for art catalogs and whatnot.
Are they part of the press up in Vermont now?
No, well, they're in Merritt and Connecticut, but they may be.
At any rate, I think the Snyder Press took them over.
Yeah, but I think a lot of the, I guess some of those books maybe, I don't know to what extent they were produced in England as opposed to produced here.
But certainly the quality was enormous.
Going back to another point, the university press as the vehicle for the publication of the work of faculty, that's been true of most university presses.
And it was quite true of Yale in the early years of the press, when you had
You had a departmental series.
You had a history series.
You had an English series and whatnot.
And the rules of the graduate school said, of the PhDs, you were obliged to publish your book, your dissertation.
That's a requirement.
It wasn't literally enforced.
They didn't take the degree away.
But up until, say, the 1960s, relatively easy to get published with a reasonably good dissertation.
And Yale Press would do a lot of them.
Did they have to be subsidized?
Well, you know, you can get into the economics.
Yeah.
Oh, sure.
And the Franklin Papers, of course, are very, very heavily subsidized.
Yale organization or organization at Yale, which has been very generous, is the Skrull and Key Society, which is second to Skrull and Bones in age among the Yale senior societies or secret societies.
And I think their legal name is the Kingsley Trust.
So if you come upon some generous gifts, Kingsley Trust, that's
scroll and key society.
It's a very good society.
It doesn't go in with all this crap of the scholars.
Well, it looks like they're actually backing some legitimate enterprises here.
Well, you say they subsidize, what, publication of books or research or scholarship?
Books, I think.
Or maybe just unrestricted.
I don't know.
I just know.
The King of the Trust is something you have to look for.
Yeah, yeah.
Bart Giamatti, who was president of Yale.
Wonderful.
A wonderful guy.
He was a very prominent member of Scroll and Key.
Great fan of baseball.
Oh, yeah.
And the Red Sox got Red Sox.
Yeah, wouldn't he have loved to have seen that?
Yeah.
I'm an anti-Yankee fan.
Oh, yeah.
If that's anyone who beats the Yankees.
Anybody who beats the Yankees.
So where are you from?
I'm originally from New Jersey.
Oh, you are?
Yeah.
Born in New York, New Jersey, lived in Suburban Summit, and then in Connecticut, except for those three years at Duke since 1950.
But really have been here for basically your entire professional life.
In this work that you are doing on this Yale history, do you have any thoughts on the importance of a press in the life of a university?
Oh, I think they're fairly conventional thoughts, that the dissemination of knowledge is the fundamental purpose of a university.
The teaching, the discovery of knowledge, and its dissemination are sort of the three pillars of university and university purpose.
Of course, the university's got so many other purposes now that it's hard to describe.
One issue which I think is obviously affecting all university presses and the articles that one reads in places like the Chronicle of Higher Education point to... Do you mind if I shoot a couple pictures of you?
No, not at all.
Not at all.
Should there be a border between academic presses and trade houses?
That's something I...
Yeah, and the border is nonexistent in a way.
So university presses must act in many ways like trade houses.
That's what they've learned, isn't it?
Yeah.
But you also hear that, at many institutions, that it's almost a given that the university press will operate in the red, that it's accepted and it's understood.
Not that they wouldn't love that.
I've been, you know.
There's a book they call The Bullshit Book down at Princeton, which they, is this the title of the book?
Oh, huh.
Have you heard of that?
No, I haven't.
Oh, it's a little 80-page mark.
Oh, oh, oh, yeah.
Oh, no, I saw it on the shelf.
It's become an extraordinary bestseller.
Yeah, I saw that on the counter in the bookstore.
And they just can't believe their fabulous luck.
It's a New York Times bestseller, you know.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, that's what I said.
Yeah.
I spent a minute and read it.
Right.
I'll shoot a couple.
This is just for my own.
Sure, sure.
I just like the pictures.
Go ahead.
But when I was on the Publications Committee, I was something of a critic of the Yale Press reaching out and getting republication rights of trade books, because the trade publishers, for, I guess, tax reasons, didn't want to have an inventory.
I didn't want to keep
stock of these books, and so they were available.
And so Yale was doing some of that.
And I was saying, and maybe I was being a little too pure, this isn't new scholarship.
This book exists.
And all you're going to do is, well, maybe prolong its life in print.
But these weren't great scholarly books to begin with.
And I've been the reader for a time.
I don't know if God knows how many talents in that experience.
I don't know if it's for me, but... I'm sorry, sir.
He's not here.
I'm using his office.
He's not here?
I can't.
I'm actually just using the office while he's away for today.
So I can't help you, sir.
I expect not, because the people who showed me into the office told me he's going to be away for a while, which is why they allow me to.
I think so.
Good luck to you.
Sorry.
So, um, I've been as a reader for lots of manuscripts.
What are you looking for as a reader?
originality, new light on the subject, good writing or something.
Which you don't always necessarily get with it.
That's right.
I'm a hound on that.
Are there any books that you champion that you're particularly proud of?
Hmm.
I don't know.
Well, I think about it.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, anyway.
Yeah.
But so go ahead.
Originality and good writing.
Yeah.
Well, one book which is a little different, because it was a memoir by Al Kernan called In Plato's Cave.
Al Kernan was a Yale faculty member, then moved to Princeton, and he's a literary conservative in English, deplored deconstruction, postmodernism, and his literary views are
those that I share, and it was just a wonderful memoir.
This is really off the track, but I did get into a bit of a discussion with the editors.
I forget who the particular editor of that book was.
I found quite a few errors, not fundamental errors, but errors.
He had some dates wrong.
He had some names wrong.
He said he'd seen someone at a certain time when someone, in fact, had died.
You know, little things like that.
They're not that little, though.
Yeah, yeah.
And so I had a long list of those things.
The editor came back and said, no, this is an authentic text.
This is a memoir.
And I said, come on.
It isn't as if we're republishing a long...
lost a manuscript of Chaucer.
We're not going to change Chaucer.
Oh, well.
Could the book get published?
Oh, yeah.
With its inaccuracies?
Yeah.
Really?
They're very small, but, you know.
A wrong date is a wrong date.
It drives me crazier than to have somebody come to me tell me that.
And I think anyone who's honest
with himself or herself knows that memory is fallible.
In this book I'm writing, I will, in the first draft, write something as I remember it, and then check up on myself and find I didn't remember it right.
I generally find when I pull stuff out of memory that I'm damn certain it's correct.
Those are the times when I make the mistakes.
Yeah, yeah.
Because I haven't, I got a letter from a Navy, a Royal,
Captain in the British Royal Navy, based in Islamabad, of all places.
It must be intelligence.
And he had found a copy of my first book, A Gentle Madness, in a second-hand bookstore.
And he loved it.
He was writing me a fan letter all the way from, you know.
And I knew he was driving, but something said, it says here you're a former naval officer, which I am.
And he said, how in the hell did you get the Battle of Trafalgar into 1812 when it's 1807?
No, no, it's five.
1805, but you know, 1805.
And it was one of those throwaway lines.
I was learning about Samuel Pepys and how he was credited with coming back and building the great professional Navy, which
But I had to throw the date of the battle at my life.
Why even bother?
I didn't need it.
But it's those kinds of things that come back to really grab you.
And you wish they'd found it five editions ago when I could have fixed it.
Well, an issue involves fact-checking for presses.
I have a feeling reading books in general...
The publishers do not assume much responsibility for fact-checking, or maybe none.
It's all up to the author.
And the copy editor.
Yeah, well, the copy editor should do it.
So when I'm a reader, I will give them a prose evaluation, and I might give them 20 pages of, you know, page 209, line 6.
I did something, I have a book coming out in December with Harper's, and I
and I did something with this book I've never done before, but I have profiles of about a dozen major people, like Robert Coles and Sherwin Newland here, and Helen Vendler, and Robert Fagels and Elaine Fagels.
So what unites them?
The title of the book is Every Book Its Reader, The Power of the Printed Word to Stir the World of Books.
I basically figured these are some of the greatest readers that I've ever had an opportunity to meet.
And so Venlo on poetry, Fagels on classical works in translation.
Newland I knew before he published a word other than medical stuff.
Yes, great books.
And we have, he and I have the same literary agent who actually proposed to him how we got to tie a book.
But in this instance, I'd never done this before, but I allowed them to read the sections that I wrote about them.
And I mean, why not?
And it's amazing, especially when I tape everything, you figure you must have it right.
Well, you don't have it right.
You have a chance to go over what you said.
You might say, oh, man, how the hell did I say that?
It's amazing how many.
Christopher Ricks, he wanted to change the whole structure so it didn't sound like spoken conversation at all.
It became, but it's fine.
I have Harold Bloom in there, who's a kick.
Oh, indeed.
He's something else.
Oh, boy.
And I love Helen Dunlop and Daniel Aaron.
We talked about the Lives of America.
Oh.
And Matt Bruckley down at South Carolina.
And I've got Breon Mitchell at Indiana, who's a modern translator.
That's great.
It'll be fun.
I'll make sure you get a copy of it.
It's coming out.
I'm very excited about it, in fact.
I don't know how we get off on that, but making sure it's right.
Yeah, yeah.
But readability is something.
You find that when you were on the publications committee that you would argue about
There's potential, but it didn't deliver.
The way the Publications Committee operated, and this is now five to ten years ago, I'm afraid exactly when I got off.
I think I got off.
Are you waiting for somebody?
No, no, exactly.
We've got plenty of time.
Okay.
Was that we would meet monthly in the big boardroom there with sandwiches.
the director of the press presides.
And we would get, in advance, so much stuff we needed a wheelbarrow, practically, to bring it over.
Usually not full manuscripts, but it would be the appraisal of the editor who was in charge of that book, a proposed book, plus the outside reader's evaluations, and maybe a chapter or two.
So there were
And we would, you know, 300 books a year and 10 meetings a year.
You know, we'd go roughly through 10 every meeting, about a three-hour meeting.
And so three things could happen.
One, this is slam dunk.
Great.
It's a well-known author.
Yale Press has published this author before.
It's going to be a great success.
Go for it.
Two, this book has got a lot of promise.
But the readers have pointed to some flaws.
Some of us as members of the committee have noted some flaws.
Encourage the author to revise and resubmit.
And three, no, not now, not ever, which is fairly rare, because all of these books had been recommended by an editor.
So the politics of that is a little dicey, because if you really reject a book, you're reflecting on the editor.
It is a whole different dynamic.
I know that my deadline for this manuscript, you know, 50,000 words, is, well, if I go longer, I go longer.
next year.
And then they said, publication is 2008.
I said, I said, you're right.
I said, I turned books in, 150,000 word books.
And this book that's coming out in December, I turned in in March, and we were already down the copy and everything, and now I'm waiting for the galleys to come back any day now, you know, and I'll have two, three passes of the galleys.
Yeah, I mean, my book, I've had
in the time that I've been with my big book.
But that's the way it is.
Yeah, but I've been very slow on it because the task has just been so enormous.
But I've had four editors on it, including John Ryden himself, which was a mistake because John was too busy to be a good editor.
And I've got Chris Rogers now, who's good, who I'd worked with before on a Knopf book.
Anyway, where are we?
Just the Publications Committee.
Every faculty member who served on that committee, I think, would agree that it's perhaps the most interesting thing one can do at the university.
Really?
Yeah, because you meet with faculty in other fields, not much in science, because, again, as you know, science publication is almost entirely in the scientific journals.
But through the humanities, social sciences, natural science, art, you know, the whole thing.
So we got a pretty good insight into what was coming, what people were writing, what the press was doing.
It was very satisfying.
Maybe even having a hand in its direction.
Yeah, yeah.
How do you feel just to switch gears entirely?
I know the Franklin project goes on apace, and the Lord knows how many volumes of that there will be.
There is a move afoot, especially where you get this federal funding that may not be forthcoming for some of these projects, and there's a lot of movement also to do this stuff strictly electronically.
Yeah, I know.
How do you feel about the book?
Well, I feel sad and nostalgic.
I mean, do you think it's a terminal species?
Yeah.
That is the... The grand monument publishing project.
The Woodrow Wilson papers, I think they're...
The Franklin Papers, I think, are up to 80 or something like that, and still a way to go.
Maybe 15 more.
And a very good friend of mine is Barbara Oberg, who was the editor of the Franklin Papers, and then she was lured away to Princeton to be editor of the Jefferson Papers, so that's where she is now.
But she's spending most of her time, as far as I could tell, trying to raise money.
I, you know, as a historian, have used these monumental publications, well-edited collections of original papers.
But I think electronic, we'll take the, I mean, if we're going to have the papers of George W. Bush, I'll have for a bit.
We're going to have them.
All blank papers.
Yeah, yeah.
I taught the son of a bitch.
Did you really?
Yeah.
Excuse me.
Did he read?
No, that's fine.
No, he had very low grades.
Great kindred spirits.
I was sort of embarrassed because... This will be off the record, too, but I'd love to hear it.
Well, the... And my word is solid.
No, when he was nominated for the presidency in 2000,
The New Yorker magazine, for some reason, got hold of his grade transcript.
I remember that.
And published a facsimile of it.
And that's, you know, that's a violation of law, the so-called Buckley Amendment.
But the transcript just gave the course numbers, like History 32 and so on, but didn't give the professors, and the title of the course.
So somebody could have put that together.
They did, and Washington posted it immediately.
They called me, and I could identify, even without going back to a course catalog, most of them.
So the one course was a seminar in history, and taught by a guy who's
since become the chief of manuscripts of the Library of Congress.
And I said to the Washington Post, you're practically within shouting distance.
Call him up.
And so the guy said, George Bush?
He said, I prided myself on knowing every student.
This was a seminar.
There were no more than 12 students.
I have no memory of him whatsoever.
He probably never showed up.
Like the Air Force equipment.
Oh, well.
At any rate, on the great monumental publications, I just don't see them coming anymore.
I mean, you certainly can't do more electronically in terms of volume, but there's still something about having that artifact, that hard copy.
But I would think what you probably should do, because it's scholars in most cases that would be using this material, would be to put them online, but in
scanned in facsimile, so that you see an image of the original.
I think that's so important.
It's like trying to read Emily Dickinson's poetry when she never published.
I mean, so how she wrote them.
Oh, yeah.
So the fascicles, I think they call them.
a Yale man, Ralph Franklin, I think, a supervisor and Harvard publisher.
You really have to see them.
In the order that she found them, she self-published them in her mind.
And that's the facsimile, the reason why you have to see them.
What discourages me, I think, and you hear this from, I think, almost any historian, you've got undergraduates who are so adept at the internet, they think that all knowledge is to be found on the internet.
And there was a piece about the University of
Texas at Austin, where the undergraduate library doesn't have any books anymore.
They're moving them out.
They moved them out, yeah.
Not all of them.
Yeah, but most of them.
But this building that was erected to be a library is now all computer terminals.
Yeah, I just gave a talk at Central Michigan University, where they just redid a $55 million library.
I mean, who knew?
You know, up in Michigan, a beautiful library where they have the books.
It's just more or less blend seamlessly with the electronics, and it was kind of nice.
But when you see them just throw out the books as they're doing at Texas.
Yeah, I haven't thrown them out, but we've moved a lot of them off off-site.
Yeah, and I wrote about that in one of my books, and that's fine.
I mean, at least you're not getting rid of the books.
You have 11 million books in Yale.
The number of books checked out is going down.
Is it?
Yeah.
Well, that's not so bad.
No.
But on the graduate level, too?
Well, I don't think they disagree.
The library publishes in its annual report how many books have been checked out, how many checkouts.
Per student?
Well, total.
That is the total number.
How many books have been checked out by readers?
And that number has gone down a little bit.
But there's a statistic, and I cited it in one of my books, I think, that when Berkeley, when their acquisitions started going down, and they started spending less, and this is like within the last 10 years, the number of PhDs awarded started to go down, and then when they started to resume the pace, you could actually relate over 100 years, the ALA statistics that acquisitions
That makes sense.
I mean, if you're getting primary research material, that attracts scholars.
But that's why I asked on the graduate level if that... I can see it in the undergraduate.
Well, for history, most of the real work for dissertation is in unpublished material in most dissertations.
And when I think about purchasing things, of course, that must also... I would think it would involve primary stuff.
And you've got interlibrary loan.
I would think that the... I don't know what the year...
curve that you have for Berkeley, but it would be more the real difficulties the University of California system seem to be having, and then recovery a bit.
Well, they started to .
Okay.
Well, any other, as you can hear, I'm not really a Yale Press insider.
No, but I love this.
That's a great option.
I have to say.
Who would have thought that the Vinland... Why did Paul Mellon buy it, do you think?
Do you think that would be reflected in the correspondence here of the records?
That's interesting.
Given his overwhelming focus on things English, the poem Mellon Gallery, now called the British Arts Center, originally called the Mellon Gallery, and all went into
his philanthropy and art in general, focusing on British.
Well, when I was up in Worcester, he spent a million dollars just to buy the Stubbs pictures out of the Worcester Public Library that they found there.
And it was a million bucks, and how could they turn it down to a million bucks?
And here they are, here.
But the Vinland map, you know, one wonders.
He must have been persuaded of its importance and its authenticity.
My guess is that the Vitors, who were very socially prominent and wealthy, and Alec Vitor, who was about the same age as Paul Mellon, that they may have been personal friends.
That's just a hunch on it.
If it was a forgery, if, the motivation would be what, to tell it?
There was a dealer here in New Haven, but he didn't own it.
Not Bill Reese.
What?
No, no, no, no.
Oh, that's too far back.
Yeah, this was a rare book.
You're talking back in the 60s.
Yeah, something like Whitmer or something like that.
Oh, I know who you mean.
Actually, Hannah wrote about him once.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So he didn't.
He was an intermediary.
He didn't own the... I'll have to check it out.
And the new edition has a good introduction that explains... So, do you think there's anything... So, but, you know, if it was a forgery, someone is going to make a lot of money.
Well, if it's a half a million dollars, that's right.
Because it's more than just somebody being naughty, you know.
You had started by saying that books that have drawn great attention and books that have a degree of notoriety, and I think we talked about...
Yeah, about the notorious books.
Well, The Lonely Crowd, Reisman's The Lonely Crowd.
A million copies.
Yeah, and it may be close to the best-seller.
I think it is.
Yeah, yeah.
And then John Ryland told me the other day about... Ryden.
I'm sorry.
I said Ryland.
about the decision to publish Long Day's Journey Into Night, you know, and how Bennett Serif had given his word to Eugene O'Neill that he wouldn't do it for X number of years.
Oh, yeah.
Carlotta became involved, you know, that she wanted to, and he said, there might be some very good correspondence here that would give you some insight into, you know, and that became, of course, a huge, hugely successful work.
Seen it as a plague several times.
But she was adamant about having it done.
Would you mind if I contact you at some point?
Sure, no problem at all.
Follow-ups?
Yeah, I'm here all summer.
It'll probably be a little later than that.
Yeah, okay, I'll be here.
Do you prefer email?
At the moment, I'm having a terrible problem with my computer, and I think it's got a virus in it that I can't seem to get out of.
I mean, I can't open my email, and I keep going to the techies.
I have to buy a completely new computer.
Why don't you phone me?
Okay.
It's area code 203.
Mm-hmm.
865-9495.
Terrific.
Okay.
It won't be for a while.
I'm going to get a massive material here, and I told Janice that the next time that we'll do one interview, and then I'll really spend the day, and I think I'm ready now to start going through this stuff.
If you were doing this,
What would you like to see?
Well, I guess, given my, in taking this literally, that my focus is on the concern is the university as a whole.
So I would want to see, and indeed I almost deliberately said I can't do everything and I'm not going to do radio press in this big book.
I would want to see how the presidents, the provosts,
the green-eye-shaded people dealt with the press.
In what way?
Well, I don't know how much subsidy the university provides now.
Maybe almost none.
Maybe none.
I really don't know.
But of course, it's a regular budgetary unit of the university.
So that isn't very sexy.
But for the overall operation of the university and the setting of priorities,
outside the Yale Press, I would be interested in that.
How they perceive the press.
Yeah, exactly.
Perceive the role of it.
Do they think it should have kind of an independent ?
You don't find presidents and deans
in public statements mention Yale Press very often.
Well, I mean, yeah, maybe because it's so successful.
Yeah, yeah.
And it has managed to avoid, I guess, great controversy.
It has.
Would you agree with that?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, people kind of laughed at the Vinland-Let Matt thing.
I mean, that was sort of a joke.
You think so?
Yeah.
Well, it seemed to be a joke, except to the Italians of New Haven, who took it very seriously.
But still, if there was any
error there that it was that scholars were not consulted yeah and that's probably still you know and not necessarily inexcusable but uh well they wanted to make a big secret out of it uh surprise so uh so maybe somebody would chester kerr had a lot to do just occur yeah he's dead now and he's he's uh someone that had morgan said the other day was uh he the press is me i mean he was the press was really his well he was a very
Creative and egocentric and funny.
I mean, he was just hilarious.
Great win.
He told me one story.
In fact, I forget who the individual was on the table.
He wanted to bring this editor in on the Franklin paper to some board.
And he said, well, that's ridiculous.
That's like bringing the Heiner's Help on.
That's exactly right.
He is the Heiner's Help.
Why shouldn't he be here in this decision-making process?
But then when he retired as director of the Yale Press, he went back into trade.
And he was a great friend of the president of the university, which helped.
Yeah.
Well, he was very social.
Big house on Humphrey Street.
They had renown for their parties.
Well, it's going to be a lot of fun.
Thank you so much for coming in.
And I like a good hour talk.
Yeah, good to meet you.